Welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to control technology.
I'm Matthias Kurschner, the president of the Free Software Foundation Europe.
And our guest today is Elektra, who works as a software and hardware developer and is
involved in the development of match networking and the Freifung initiative.
She's a philosopher, I think we can say, the author of the book Mesh, a co-author of the
book Wireless Networking in the Developing World, and moderates the Freifung Radio and
Radio Shows of Micro FM at Collaboration Radio on 88fear.de.
So way more experienced than I have with radio and audio recording.
Hello and welcome Elektra.
Enough of the flattering.
Thanks for inviting me.
So Elektra, both of us are from Berlin and at the time lived in Berlin.
And the first time we met was actually in Brazil at the Free Software Conference Fissile
there.
And yeah, so I am wondering actually how you got involved in Free Software before we
met there.
So that's already done.
Over 10 years ago, but I realized we haven't talked about how you actually got involved
in the first place.
Well, my first computer was the Commodore 16 and that sucked because nobody was bothering
to write software for it.
Everybody wanted a C64 back then.
Then I had a PC, a 386 without co-processor was using DOS 5.0 for Microsoft and I actually
was only doing text editing and designing printed circuit boards.
And later I bought my first pensum PC and that used Windows 95 and it was just a bummer.
Nothing did work.
And then yeah, since I'm an electronics person, I often shopped in electronic stores and
they had redhead Linux and Susie Linux in a box.
And at one point I bought Linux in a box and the first thing was the command line is so
comfortable and I got an entire planet of opportunities.
Like all the universities, all the machines, all the stuff you need to do something.
It was all there and was all open waiting for me to play with it like a big planet official
technique but in software.
It's also interesting because like for myself, the first GNU Linux distribution I got, I bought
myself or I got it landed from a friend and then I bought others and we landed around.
Nowadays most people, they just download it and often confuse free software with creative
software.
And for us, we had to buy it from the beginning, this association isn't so present there.
So for you, it was the getting this large tool set empowering you in what you want to
do.
We plan it with all the resources for free and it also rang the bell of Mutual Aid.
You probably know the book Mutual Aid by the Russian anarchist Krapodkin.
I have to admit, no, I don't know it.
Well, this is like a huge gap.
You should read Mutual Aid because it's an anti-social Darwinist book.
And he's proving that for the flourishment of the species, it is important that the individuals
from the species, they help each other.
So survival is not the battle of the fittest and only the fittest one survives.
The fittest species is also that one where the individuals help each other.
So that's, yeah, that's in a nutshell.
So when I think about how we first met, that was when you were, when people asked you
to help with setting up machine networking also there in in Brazil, right?
So we're in the favelias there and looking where could we build the antennas?
How did you end up in this area of work?
Well, I was always fascinated with wireless communication with radio.
I think I was like eight or nine when I've built my first radio.
It was a simple detector radio and probably a bit younger when I first built my first
circuits and radio always has fascinated me.
And there was also the reason why I got involved in electronics.
At first I was more involved in electronics rather than in programming and computing,
but computers of course, so the Department of Electronics.
So it was also fascinating and, yeah, then the came the internet and a minute in the
internet was like two cents back then and so you had to count the minutes and, yeah.
And then the first DSL lines came and there was the opportunity to share those lines via
radio and so I started to build some wireless technology.
There was pre-WIFI, WIFI was already there, but it was an affordable.
And so when WIFI became affordable and there was a budget for that community, I was involved
in the low tech.
It was like before the term hacker space, mecherspace was coined.
There were these groups of like squatters basically in the Netherlands and in Germany that
were setting up internet cafes and training centers for open stores, teaching people
how to use GPG, how to install Linux or open BSD or free BSD or whatever.
Well, that's now more than 20 years ago, 25, 26 years.
And that was also the time when you Electra got involved with Batman.
No, Batman was an invention I made together with Thomas Lopatik in 2005, 2006 because I was
hacking on mesh routing protocols because routing and forwarding is a natural extension
if you do radio communication because every radio communication device has a limited range.
But if there are other devices that mutually help in the forwarding data, then you can
build a cloud like a beehive where everybody is connected to everybody else, regardless
of the individual range.
So all the machines are contributing to build an infrastructure which is based on multi-point
to multi-point networking, radio communication is always a broadcast.
It's an artificial limitation if Wi-Fi networks provide hotspots where all the clients
need the central hotspot in order to communicate with each other.
And since the Wi-Fi protocols, since the beginning, at least in theory supported the
ad hoc mode, which is basically multi-point to multi-point communication in 800.11, I got
the idea that we need some kind of software that organizes the interconnection between
those devices so that every device relates traffic for every other device if needed and
this can be done over multiple hops.
So you can cover an entire area with such a network and it would be license-free, it can
operate in a license-free band.
And so this idea was ripe even before I joined Freifunk, but when I joined the Freifunk
community at the beginning, I wrote a Wikipedia article in the Freifunk Wiki and explained
the idea.
And to my surprise, there was a crowd of people that were excited about the idea and that's
how machine networking at Freifunk essentially started here in Berlin.
And can you explain again what bad man then exactly is with the machine networking now?
That's the, you explain that, that it's enlarging the range of the network and all the peers
help each other to reach the other peers.
Well in the field of machine networking, so radio-based machine networking with multi-point
to multi-point, capable radios, there are different types of protocols.
Some are proactive and some are reactive.
Reactive protocols, we can just skip there only trying to learn about the existence of
the network and how they can get from A to B if there is a demand while proactive networking
protocols, they always try to have an idea of the network so that if you want to send
something from A to B, you already can scan the network to see who is there and then
you decide I want to send something to B. And in the field of the proactive protocols,
there were, yeah, there are the link state protocols and they try to calculate a graph involving
all the vectors between all these individual nodes in the network.
And calculating this graph is immensely costing in CPU and RAM and also in network traffic.
And on top of that all, the optimized link state routing algorithm OLSR, it's one of these
link state routing algorithms, it created routing loops, it didn't work as promised.
So it was one of the protocols that we tried in Berlin and at least Berlin is still using
it.
I didn't manage to convince the Berlin community to make the switch from OLSR entirely
to Batman back then, it was like 2006, the first Batman code was written.
And so the idea is to have proactive protocol that is loop free and consumes less networking
overhead in protocol messages, less CPU power and less RAM.
And yeah, Batman algorithm has achieved that.
So I mean, maybe it makes sense that you explained to some of the listeners who aren't familiar
with RIFU from out of Germany what that is and that you accomplished in Berlin with that.
It's a community network where people built their own infrastructure based on radio.
Not all open community networks on the planet are only using radio, but at least here
for Berlin and for Germany in general.
It's based on Wi-Fi because here regulations and so on and such are so complicated, it's
easier to set up wireless links than to dig up streets and areas and put your own fiber
into the ground.
There are other communities like the GIFI network in Catalonia, in Spain.
They dig their own fibers.
And there are other communities properly as well that do this.
But yeah, we're building our own infrastructure.
And it's basically also a technology to deliver services to the last mile.
That's when you roll out internet connectivity or a network.
Then yes, of course, you can have a fiber line from a major city to another major city.
But then you have to distribute it to the households, for example, to the individual
people wherever they live.
And one way to do that is of course, with radio and mesh networking can help that.
So what we're doing is not local area networking.
We're doing like metropolitan area networking or yeah, in a certain district, people can
use that technology.
Yeah, and of course, there's much more to explain to that, which would be way out of
the scope of your podcast.
And I mean, for cities or like Berlin or also countries like Germany, the aspects you
talked about before that you need more CPU, more RAM for the other protocol before that
might not be such a big issue, right, because a lot of people they can afford to have that
they have enough energy resources, often available to do that.
I could imagine that this is completely different for the other work you did in some of the
developing countries where it's very more difficult with the energy or yes, it's the
filter I'm operating in, please, everybody don't get me wrong.
If you can afford to put fiber to every household, please do so.
But if you're in an area where money is limited, where energy resources are limited, where
you want to have a basic service quickly, you can roll it out with wireless technology.
It doesn't have, it's not always only mesh, it can be point-to-point backbone links and
the backbone network.
And the mesh is then that part that delivers it individually to the households, it's
so solving the problem of the last mile.
That's also why I got involved in South Africa with the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research.
They had a program last mile, first inch, there was a development program where they were
looking for delivering internet access to households in South Africa.
And beside being a software developer for a very long time now, you're also developing
open hardware there for accomplishing those projects.
So I am there, there's one part that you create mesh networks with powered by solar power.
Can you explain a little bit how hard that came to happen and what the challenges there
were?
I think you're referring to the mesh potato, maybe.
While I was working in South Africa at the Meraka Institute in Chvane, I got in contact
with Steve Song, who was working for the shuttle Valve foundation, and he had the idea to
the project village Telco, the idea of providing voiceover IP services over a solar powered
mesh network, or in general for mesh networks.
And since I'm an electronic person, I got involved in developing parts of the electronics
of the device.
But this is history now, this happened in 2008, and it's already an exhibition artifact
here in the German Technical Museum in Berlin.
What are the current challenges in this field to make sure that more people get a network
connection in places where you can't have fiber that easily?
Well power and suitable radios, but there's already a number of people that are involved
in that field, I'm just one of them today.
So I was kind of a pioneer in that field.
There are not people doing stuff with lower radios, like a text communication in disaster
areas and stuff like this.
And yeah, one of my projects that I'm doing at the moment is a device.
It's the Freifunk Open Maximum Powerpoint tracker.
There are several generations, one is based on an old 8-bit microcontroller, and now
I'm using ESP32, which is like 32-bit and has Wi-Fi and lots of other gadgets built
in.
And it's essentially to design, to build independent wireless nodes operated with solar
power, where you can monitor the solar system from afar.
And if you have a Wi-Fi device, an extra device connected to it, you can monitor it as well,
and you can turn it on and off, for example, if it has a software hanger and so on.
So that's stuff that I'm doing at the moment.
I mean, you already hinted at it a bit, but I mean, you're traveling many countries and
you used to.
You used to, at the moment not.
Yes, when I was working in South Africa, I probably, yeah, I was one of these people that
created an awful lot of pollution already.
When we met at the Fisley, I wrote to the people, thanks, nice for inviting me, but I usually
don't fry like 20,000 kilometers just for a weekend to give a talk.
Are there other things for me that you want me to do so I can stay for at least a month?
And so they had, and so I started to work in Chile and since I got in Chile.
And later in Valparaiso, so I was already back then, I was aware that my traveling activity
was contributing a huge amount of carbon dioxide to the planet and that we should try to avoid
this.
So I had a personal feeling that I'm also responsible for it, which you could criticize
and say, hey, it's not you that is the problem, but yeah, I was aware of this and at the moment
I'm no longer working in South Africa and I will only travel if it's really necessary
for a really big, important project.
So I reduced my number of flights by a great margin.
And I mean, for me, it was the question I had there was mainly, I mean, the travel part
is one part, which is a bit sometimes difficult and you have to spend a lot of time on that.
But I mean, in general, I was thinking about your involvement and all the energy you put
into all of this work in the last years where it's usually not done by some few hours
a day where you are involved in that and you get some money for that and that's all
of why you are doing this.
So I mean, you are working on this for other reasons and that was the question I was getting
at what, why are you working on all of that and putting so much energy and time of you
into this?
Well, my idea was like that democratizing communication, so giving communication to
everyone and sharing knowledge according to the principle of mutual aid, coming back
to the Kropotkin, works for the betterment of mankind.
We are all standing on the shoulders of giants, the language that we use, the knowledge that
we have, the maps that we use, all that has been created by other humans in the past.
And we are all building on top of others.
And there are people on this planet that are pretty much excluded from that.
Because the resources are not there.
So my idea was to improve the betterment of human society by democratizing communications.
But on the other hand at the moment, I'm also a little bit depressed because with the ability
for everyone to communicate, it was also increasing the level of where people start communicating
hatred and disinformation and so on.
So it's a two-bladed sword.
But I hope that that edge that supports mankind will finally prevail.
I think that's something for many developers when they see that there's also things done
with what they created that they don't think that is something fitting into their worldview
or how people should behave.
That's very difficult.
On the other hand, it's then when you are for open communication and you want people
to work together and the question is like if you start limiting some of the things that
can be done, what good things would you prevent in the world?
Yeah.
Well, this is like you're either promoting open communication, which I still do wholeheartedly
or you don't.
Which would bring us to other fields of censorship, control, surveillance, you know, once you have
an open communication system where people share data and talk about themselves, they can
also be the target of surveillance and so on.
So this is an even another aspect.
That is still sent by my optimism that it is for the benefit of mankind.
And it's just something you can offer back then when I had the idea to Batman to get
it with Thomas.
I got so excited that it would be such a beautiful protocol and then it took me a couple
of hours until I realized, oh, but if that mesh communication protocol is really so powerful
and can do so, can organize communication so well sooner or later the military will
also look for a protocol and that's what happened.
And back then when we started the website open mesh org and open mesh net, we registered
both URLs and I'm still keeping it.
We came up with a license where we took the GPL and we added some comment that the protocol
is only legal to be used in non-military and non-surveillance activities.
We actually asked the Free Software Foundation and we got to reply, don't do it, don't
add more licenses and yeah, well, in the end, the military guys that we saw in our IP
logs, one of them approached us and said, I'm sitting on the board and I try to convince
my fellow people that they use your protocol because it's cool.
But with that name, bad man, nobody's taking it serious.
Can you please change the name of your project?
So he never got a reply to that email.
And there's also people that complained that we did that step and removed that part in
the license, non-military and non-surveillance.
So that's now removed.
We removed it back then after getting feedback and some people are complaining that we did
it.
It's not a free software license anymore from the definition, but yes, it's very hard.
I think that your approach then, that's something which I hear from a lot of developers that
they choose a free software license because they want to make sure that all the positive
things can develop out of it and that we don't go into a direction where then people are
adding other restrictions and then you, after some time, you disable people to actually
work together.
But on the other hand, it doesn't mean that you have to fully support things that you
don't approve and you don't have to reply people.
You don't have to give them support.
You don't have to do special development for them just because they offer money and all
of that.
Well, the conclusions that we have drawn back then was we are not going to patent the algorithms.
So when they see what we're doing, they can study what we're doing and they can just
re-implement it.
And since it's military and they can just keep it secret, you can just copy our code.
And I guess a legal fight would be pointless.
Yeah.
One topic I wanted to quickly go into as well, now some shift from, I'm sorry, but actually
maybe it's not too far because it's also about, yeah, others controlling you.
So at the FSFE, we work on initiative.
It's a route of freedom where we want to achieve it that the ISP, the Internet Service
provider cannot tell you what route or you have to use in your at home, but that you
can decide yourself.
So from your perspective, is this a huge problem in Europe that the ISPs can just decide
there or for mesh networking or is it something where you think that this doesn't have a huge
impact on the, on possibility of, of more community networks?
Well, when you talk about the router lockdown, what immediately comes to my memory is that
I signed a letter to get rid of Tim Berners-Lee and other people against the idea of the Federal
Communications Commission trying to ban open WOT and Open Source.
Can you quickly say what, what open WRT is?
Well, back then, links is they had a router that WRT 54G and some folks discovered, hey,
this is using GPL software.
So for Fox sake, you have to publish your sources.
And so they had to comply and they actually did at one point.
So people starting hacking these devices and they were immensely useful because they
were like 8002.11 G hardware with two antennas, quite, actually quite good hardware.
And so it was, it was possible to liberate the hardware.
And for like 60 euros, at the beginning, maybe 80 euros, it was a lot of bang for the
buck back then these days.
It's like a wireless router, like 10 to 15 euros, the cheapest ones.
So that enabled us to build fry-funk networks at a much higher pace and much higher penetration
and made it much, much more easier.
Some clever guys from the Open Source community came up with patches and so on.
So it was a big success and thanks to the GPL-ing and publishing the sources, a project was
created and since it was a project about hacking that wireless router from links and it was
to WRT 54G, the project had to got the name open WRT.
But of course, these days, that's the history and it's now for all kinds of wireless
devices and it's a very great Linux distribution.
It's a meta-distribution that you learn to use in order to support your wireless device
and not only wireless devices, there's also going into the Raspberry Pi and so on.
But clearly the focus is on wireless routing technology.
That's what they refer to today.
So today, don't think of the links anymore, think of wireless routing technology, open
Linux distribution.
And you were at explaining that you wrote a letter or signed a letter with Tim Berns-Lee
together?
And others against the Federal Communication Commission of the United States because they
initiated an attempt to ban open WRT altogether from devices in the United States.
And unfortunately, the European Commission is following that.
So they're coming up with regulations, they say a virus radius can do damage, think
they can do harm and so software freedom has to be abandoned because yeah, so and of
course, why I mentioned this in this context is the argument is that banning open
source would make networking infrastructure more unsafe.
And this is of course a problem that you also mentioned on your website.
One provider has like one million devices rolled out and there is no updates from the company.
The company lost interest in updating the hardware.
So you have to use an unsafe hardware that now in times of war with people, even from
state actors, start attacking networks, this is a clear no go.
On the other hand, if you are ISP and you have the same device everywhere, it's easier
to roll out updates and so on and so forth.
But users should not be forced to obey to a hardware lockdown.
For most people, they are not too involved, there are not many people on this planet that
start to configure their own device, they just sign up a contract and they just use whatever
they get.
And if it's not working, they call the hotline and the hotline tells them to restart the
device and then everything is going to be fine.
That's also one of the aims there for us in the area of device neutrality that some
people might decide that they just use what they get provided.
But on the other hand, that individuals, organizations, sometimes even larger organizations
or even countries that they are able to choose other devices and still be able to communicate
and still be able to act with those devices and accomplish their goals with that and
had something with the route of freedom and the other part you mentioned with the radio
equipment directive on the European level where we are also working on where there are
sometimes really strange arguments why it should be prevented to use other software
on radio capable hardware.
It's completely overarching, the FCC was completely overarching and Europe just follows
blindly and the problem is it's technology from technology devices, it's even not feasible
what they're planning and it will make the planet more insecure and it's ludicrous because
the Raspberry Pi for example is completely FCC approved but you can just use the GPI
open from the device and you can broadcast whatever you like because modern day technology,
modern day microcontrollers, CPUs, they are so flexible you can modulate whatever you like
at what frequency you like and so this is like tell the sun to stop shining because it's
too hot, it's ridiculous, it's ludicrous and that's also a lesson that I think some
bureaucrats in the United States and in Europe have to learn and they hopefully learned
it soon.
It's a long way and I think about all the meetings we participated in and the arguments
you hear there, it's something which really requires long, long time to explain it again
and again and then some things happen and then under arguments that you brought before
are then better understood and yeah but it's yeah a lot of work to get those arguments through.
Well but their idea of control, where does it end, you kind of just stop there then you have to
to ban on the electronic components that you buy, yeah you have to limit compilers,
where does it end, where does it end, this is like it's utterly ridiculous and yeah let's hope
that there is still a rest of sense in your brains.
That's why it's so important that people like you that many other people who who joined us
in those discussions there that they continue to talk with decision makers about that or support
others in doing so so that we get those points across against the sometimes very big large
lobby from other companies there but yeah I still, so I'm exploding the amount of time that you
want to dedicate to the product so we have to come a little bit to the end but so one one question
I wanted to ask you is with all that work in all that different countries and for such a long time
what was the funniest most memorable exceptional thing that you think about when you think about
like free software? Well the most memorable moment was when I reached the lowest south of South Africa
in the area of Cape Town and I went to a very poor area and there were the blue linksys boxes
running a fryphone firmware from Berlin and so that's when I really had to realize
what we had done, what we had achieved that people living in a township
had entered access thanks to software and ideas that were
initiated somewhere here in the western world and I had the idea I would like I would love to
just travel around and see this type of installations and maybe do a film about it
that would have been cool but of course it would involve a huge amount of traveling
but it clearly was like a very inspiring moment. I can imagine
then I have to come to the last question and that's always when I talk to people the same one
so on on the 14th of February we always celebrate the ala free software day where we ask people to
thank other contributors, other groups, organizations out there for their work and I don't think
we have to limit that to one day so I'm always asking my guests are there any developers,
contributors, organizations out there whom you would like to thank for their work for free software?
Oh dear there is too many to mention actually I can only talk about people that I was working
with personally but already to people whose names I cannot remember because there are too many
that provided me with that Linux experience with that Linux kernel and all the stuff that I
that I had access to when I started using redhead Linux and later slackware
but in particularly I would like to thank some folks that I have been working with like
Thomas Lopartic who was coding with me Oles R and Batman. He was actually the major coder
and Sven Ola took it from the from the Berlin-Fryphone community for his hacks on the WRT 54G
and especially in the Broadcom driver Axel Neumann who supported me in Batman hand
later forked to his own Batman project Simon Wunderlich. Sven Eichelmann you know there's
there's many many names to to mention and I guess they're all all driven by by by this idea
to share and contribute because actually this is what we humans in a positive sense are
we all share and contribute and we create something that are a stand on and we're already
standing on the shoulders of giants like Albert Einstein has put it once.
Electra thank you very much for talking with me about all those interesting topics.
It's a pleasure. Thank you very much for all the work you did. Yes thank you.
So this was the software freedom podcast. If you like the episode please
recommend it to your friends and subscribe to make sure that you will get the next episode.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe where a charity that
works to promote software freedom. If you like our work please consider supporting us with a
donation you will find more information on their fsfe.org/donate. Thank you very much.